WIP: Rln relay (#29)
vacp2p/vacp2p.github.io: _posts/2021-02-19-26-rln-relay.md

---
layout: post

> name:  "Integrating rate limiting nullifiers into Waku Relay to enable spam-protection."

Reviewer: How about, "Privacy preserving economic spam protection in Waku v2 with Rate Limiting Nullfiers"?

title:  "Integrating rate limiting nullifiers into Waku Relay to enable spam-protection."
date:   2021-02-25 12:00:00 +0800

> author: staheri14

Reviewer: If you run it locally you can see if this author needs some more metadata

Reviewer: Discussed, update author folder with same identifiers

published: true
permalink: /waku-v2-rln-relay
categories: research

> summary: A simplified explanation of how Waku RLN-Relay mitigates the spamming issue in a p2p manner.

Reviewer: I'd have a slightly more descriptive description

> image: 

Reviewer: Picture

Author: Where does this picture show up on the website? I wanna get a feeing of what sort of picture is needed

Reviewer: Discussed

discuss: 
---

# Introduction

> This blog is going to give you an overview of how we enabled spam protection in waku relay through rate-limiting nullifiers or rln for short.

Reviewer: Nitpick but it's more of a research log, less of a blog per se, i.e. I'd just call it "post".

Also capitalization on waku relay, rln etc

Reviewer: How we enabled sounds like it is already enabled, as oppose to "how this can be achieved" It is still very experimental and far from lvie

> Firstly, let me give a little background about Waku. Waku is a privacy-preserving peer-to-peer (p2p) messaging protocol for resource restricted devices. Being p2p means that Waku relies on **No** central server, instead messages get transmitted in the network by users' (i.e., peers) collaboration. The underlying protocol (as the writeup of this blog) is [GossipSub](https://docs.libp2p.io/concepts/publish-subscribe/). In a very informal way, the message transmission in GossipSub is like I send a message to you, you send it to whoever you know, and it goes on till the message reaches its destination. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Firstly, let me give a little background about Waku. Waku is a privacy-preserving peer-to-peer (p2p) messaging protocol for resource restricted devices. Being p2p means that Waku relies on **No** central server, instead messages get transmitted in the network by users' (i.e., peers) collaboration. The underlying protocol (as of the writing of this post) is [GossipSub](https://docs.libp2p.io/concepts/publish-subscribe/). In a very informal way, the message transmission in GossipSub is like I send a message to you, you send it to whoever you know, and it goes on till the message reaches its destination. 
```

> Firstly, let me give a little background about Waku. Waku is a privacy-preserving peer-to-peer (p2p) messaging protocol for resource restricted devices. Being p2p means that Waku relies on **No** central server, instead messages get transmitted in the network by users' (i.e., peers) collaboration. The underlying protocol (as the writeup of this blog) is [GossipSub](https://docs.libp2p.io/concepts/publish-subscribe/). In a very informal way, the message transmission in GossipSub is like I send a message to you, you send it to whoever you know, and it goes on till the message reaches its destination. 

Reviewer: The last sentence can probably be rewritten for clarity

Reviewer: One thing I find useful is to do a pass of text through something like https://www.hemingwayapp.com/, that tends to make things like this clearer

> ## Spam Definition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What do we mean by spam?
```

> What does spamming stand for? In a messaging system, spam and spammer can have multiple definitions depending on context e.g., spam can be merely an unsolicited message, or spamming may mean sending an unsolicited message (spam) to large numbers of recipients (in which a large number of the recipients is emphasized). However, in a decentralized p2p system (in specific a p2p system with a GossipSub routing structure), the problem of spamming goes beyond just the recipients of a message and it affects all the peers. This is because the spam messages get routed through the collaboration of all the peers thus consume the resources of the intermediate peers; the system gets congested, and the availability of peers degrades as they get busy spending their computational power/bandwidth/storage capacity on processing spam messages.  

Reviewer: "What do we mean by spamming?"

Reviewer: Too many (), rewrite for clarity with sentences and commas

> Following the preceding argument, we define a spammer as an entity who uses the messaging system (regardless of the intention) to publish a large number of messages (regardless of the content and the number of recipients) in a short amount of time. The messages issued in this way are called spam. 

Reviewer: Ditto, I think these paragraphs can be cut down to essentials and rewritten for clarity. Distinguish two cases and define what we mean.

> ## Related Solutions

Reviewer: Maybe Alternative solutions?

> ## Related Solutions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Possible Solutions
```

> Has the spamming issue addressed before? Of course yes! Here is an overview of the spam protection techniques with their trade-offs and use-cases:

Reviewer: something on we distinguish between centralized and p2p systems...

### Centralized Messaging Systems

> In traditional centralized messaging systems e.g., mail servers, spam usually signifies unsolicited messages sent in bulk or messages with malicious content like malware. Protection mechanisms include (but are not limited to) authentication through some piece of personal information e.g., phone number, checksum-based filtering (to protect against messages sent in bulk), challenge-response systems, and content filtering (on the server or via a proxy application). These methods exploit the fact that the messaging system is centralized and a global view of the users' activities is available based on which spamming patterns can be extracted and defeated accordingly.  Moreover, users are associated with an identifier (username) which enables the server to profile each user (to detect suspicious behavior like spamming) which is against the user's anonymity and privacy. 

Reviewer: reference to "mail servers" confusing, because it might point people to Waku v1 mailservers. Probably use a more specific example

Reviewer: Also parentheses

Reviewer: ()

Reviewer: I'd elaborate a bit on how something like phone numbers raise cost for registration, and then it can be cut off from system. This makes spam, as defined within the system and not through e.g. DDoSing Signal's servers, very costly.

Author: Would you please explain a bit more about this comment, thanks! 

> I'd elaborate a bit on how something like phone numbers raise cost for registration, and then it can be cut off from system. This makes spam, as defined within the system and not through e.g. DDoSing Signal's servers, very costly.

Specially this part

> This makes spam, as defined within the system and not through e.g. DDoSing Signal's servers, very costly.

### P2P Systems
But what about spam prevention in p2p messaging platforms?  
there is the *Proof of Work* technique deployed by Whisper and *Peer scoring* method (namely reputation-based approach) adopted by LibP2P, but each of these solutions has its own shortcomings for real-life use-cases. 

#### Proof of work

> The idea behind the proof of work is to make messaging a computationally costly operation hence lowering the messaging rate of **all** the peers including the spammers. This solution does not suit heterogeneous systems with resource-restricted peers who won't be able to carry the designated computation and will be practically excluded from the system. 

Reviewer: Give example of how practically this was an issue in Status app that  had to be set to close to zero, and that this means it is trivial to spin up AWS machine. Might be worth mentioning captcha here as well, though generally this a centralized mechanism.

Also worth explaining how PoW works, since every node can validate this. And that it makes more sense in a system like Bitcoin/Ethereum

> #### Peer Scoring

Reviewer: (), also reference and link to e.g. libp2p and possible related issues

> #### Economic-Incentive Spam protection

Reviewer: It seems odd that we put this under "alternative solutions". Maybe phrase whole thing as "Possible solutions" if we can this to be included?

> But, is it the end of the spam-protection journey!? shall we get along with the spammers! Certainly not, Waku is here to save you!

Reviewer: I appreciate the jovial tone :D but grammar etc can be better here, no but, second is a question sentence etc

> We brought you a p2p spam-protection method which:

Reviewer: I'd phrase this more as. Waku Relay/RLN gives us a ...

> - is **efficient**  and fits the  network of **heterogeneous** peers (i.e., no crazy computational, storage, memory, and bandwidth requirement!). 

Reviewer: two points, more concise

- respects users privacy (unlike reputation-based and centralized methods)
- deploys economic-incentives to contain spammers' activity. Namely, there is a financial sacrifice for those who want to spam the system. How? follow along ...

We devise a general rule to save everyone's life and that is 

**No one can publish more than M messages per epoch without being financially charged!** 

We set M to 1 for now, but keep in mind, it can be any arbitrary value.
You may be thinking that it is too restrictive! one per epoch!? but don't worry, we set the epoch to a reasonable value so that it does not slow down the communication of innocent users but will make the life of spammers harder! Epoch here can be every second, as defined by UTC date-time +-20s.

> 

Reviewer: spacing between paragraphs

# Technical Terms

**Zero-knowledge proof**: Zero-knowledge proof (ZKP) allows a *prover* to show a *verifier* that they know something, without revealing what that something is. This means you can do trust-minimized computation that is also privacy preserving. As a basic example, instead of showing your ID when going to a bar you simply give them a proof that you are over 18, without showing the doorman your id. In this write up, by ZKP we essentially mean zkSNARK which is one of the many types of ZKPs. 

**Threshold Secret Sharing Scheme**: (m,n) Threshold secret-sharing is a method by which you can split a secret value s into let's say n pieces in a way that the secret s can be reconstructed by having m pieces (m < n). The economic-incentive spam protection utilizes a (2,n) secret sharing scheme instantiated by Shamir Secret Sharing Scheme.

# Overview: Economic-Incentive Spam protection through Rate Limiting Nullifiers

> The following are the foundational components of Economic-incentive spam protection:

Reviewer: This seems implementation specific. I'd phrase it as - the fundamental point is to make it economically costly to send more than your share of messages, and to do so in a privacy-preserving fashion. To do that we have the following components ~

An overview of the routing procedure is provided in Figure 2.

### Spam Detection and Slashing
In order to enable local spam detection and slashing, routing peers MUST record the `nullifier`, `shareX`, and `shareY` of any incoming message conditioned that it is not spam and has a valid proof. To do so, the peer should follow the following steps. 
1. The routing peer first verifies the `zkProof` and drops the message if not verified. 
2. Otherwise, it checks whether a message with an identical `nullifier` has already been relayed. 
   1. If such message exists and its `shareX` and `shareY` components are different from the incoming message, then slashing takes place (if the `shareX` and `shareY` fields of the previously relayed message is identical to the incoming message, then the message is a duplicate and shall be dropped).
   2. If none found, then the message gets relayed.

An overview of the slashing procedure is provided in Figure 2.

<p align="center">
    <img src="../assets/img/rln-relay/rln-message-verification.png" />
    <br />
    Figure 2: Publishing, Routing and Slashing workflow.
</p>

> # Feasibility and Open Issues

Reviewer: Missing some text here, i.e. Conclusion, possible next steps and remaining challenges

Author: I added the conclusion and the future steps

## Exceeding the messaging rate via multiple registrations
While the economic-incentive solution has an economic incentive to discourage spamming, we should note that there is still **Expensive attack(s)** that a spammer can launch to break the messaging rate limit. That is, the attacker can pay for multiple legit registrations e.g., k, hence being able to publish k messages per epoch. We believe that the higher the membership fee is, the less probable would be such an attack, hence a stronger level of spam-protection can be achieved. Following this argument, the high fee associated with the membership (which we listed above as an open problem) can indeed be contributing to a better protection level.  

# Acknowledgement
Thanks to Onur Kılıç for his explanation and pointers and for helping with development and runtime issues. Also thanks to Barry Whitehat for his time and insightful comments. 

> # References

Reviewer: Might want to number these and refer them, I think there are some missing too re pow/whisper/peer scoring etc

Author: added the missing references

---
layout: post
name:  "Privacy-preserving economic spam protection in Waku v2 with Rate Limiting Nullfiers"
title:  "Privacy-preserving economic spam protection in Waku v2 with Rate Limiting Nullfiers"

> date:   2021-02-25 12:00:00 +0800

Reviewer: Make sure data is correct here, and filename. Maybe aim for Wed/Thu/Fri release?

Author: sure

author: staheri14
published: true

> permalink: /Waku-v2-RLN-Relay

Reviewer: Maybe just /rln-relay? Also permalink so lowercase

Author: sure

categories: research

> summary: This post is going to give you an overview of how spam protection can be achieved in Waku Relay through rate-limiting nullifiers. We will cover a summary of spam-protection methods in centralized and p2p systems, and the solution overview and details of the economic spam-protection method. The open issues and future steps are discussed in the end.

Reviewer: Be careful with preview length here. I think there's risk only part of this will be shown in preview for e.g. Twitter. Can check with https://cards-dev.twitter.com/validator and sample post. I will also sometimes post it to site and check Twitter card preview before publsihing it further

Author: Sure, nice idea!

image: 

> discuss: 

Reviewer: TODO update with link, I usually figure out URL and post to Discuss first with link to it

Author: I need to publish the rln-relay post, then open a post in https://forum.vac.dev/ with a link to the rln-relay post, and then add the link of the forum post inside the rln-relay post, right?

Reviewer: You can do that, or you can compute URL from permalink and post it before it exists to discuss, then link that in post :P

Author: I also thought about what you said, but wasn't sure about putting a link to a non-existing post :D 
I have made the post on the https://forum.vac.dev/ but it is pending for approval

---

# Introduction

> This post is going to give you an overview of how spam protection can be achieved in Waku Relay[^2] through rate-limiting nullifiers[^3] [^4] or RLN for short.

Reviewer: Waku relay protocol. Consistent capitalization

    Figure 2: An overview of economic spam protection in Waku v2 RLN-Relay protocol.
</p>

## What do we mean by spamming?

In centralized messaging systems, a spammer usually indicates an entity that uses the messaging system to send an unsolicited message (spam) to large numbers of recipients. However, in Waku with a p2p architecture, spam messages not only affect the recipients but also all the other peers involved in the routing process as they have to spend their computational power/bandwidth/storage capacity on processing spam messages. As such, we define a spammer as an entity that uses the messaging system to publish a large number of messages in a short amount of time. The messages issued in this way are called spam. In this definition, we disregard the intention of the spammer as well as the content of the message and the number of recipients.

## Possible Solutions

Has the spamming issue been addressed before? Of course yes! Here is an overview of the spam protection techniques with their trade-offs and use-cases. In this overview, we distinguish between protection techniques that are targeted for centralized messaging systems and those for p2p architectures.

> ### Centralized Messaging Systems

Reviewer: Nitpick space headers

Author: done

In traditional centralized messaging systems, spam usually signifies unsolicited messages sent in bulk or messages with malicious content like malware. Protection mechanisms include 

> - authentication through some piece of personal information e.g., phone number

Reviewer: PII?

- checksum-based filtering to protect against messages sent in bulk
- challenge-response systems
- content filtering on the server or via a proxy application

These methods exploit the fact that the messaging system is centralized and a global view of the users' activities is available based on which spamming patterns can be extracted and defeated accordingly.  Moreover, users are associated with an identifier e.g., a username which enables the server to profile each user e.g., to detect suspicious behavior like spamming. Such profiling possibility is against the user's anonymity and privacy. 

### P2P Systems

> But what about spam prevention in p2p messaging platforms?  
> There are two techniques namely, *Proof of Work*[^8]  deployed by Whisper[^9] and *Peer scoring*[^6] method (namely reputation-based approach) adopted by LibP2P. However, each of these solutions has its own shortcomings for real-life use-cases as explained below. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What about spam prevention in p2p messaging platforms? There are two techniques, namely *Proof of Work*[^8]  deployed by Whisper[^9] and *Peer scoring*[^6] method (namely reputation-based approach) adopted by LibP2P. However, each of these solutions has its own shortcomings for real-life use-cases as explained below. 
```

#### Proof of work

> The idea behind the proof of work i.e., POW[^8] is to make messaging a computationally costly operation hence lowering the messaging rate of **all** the peers including the spammers. In specific, the message publisher has to solve a puzzle and the puzzle is to find a nonce such that the hash of the message concatenated with the nonce has at least z leading zeros. z is known as the difficulty of the puzzle. Since the hash function is one-way, peers have to brute-force to find a nonce. Hashing is a computationally-heavy operation so is the brute-force. POW is also used as the underlying mining algorithm in Ethereum and Bitcoin blockchain. There, the goal is to contain the mining speed and allow the decentralized network to come to a consensus, or agree on things like account balances and the order of transactions. While the use of POW makes perfect sense in Ethereum / Bitcoin blockchain, it shows practical issues in heterogeneous p2p messaging systems with resource-restricted peers. Some peers won't be able to carry the designated computation and will be effectively excluded. Such exclusion showed to be practically an issue in applications like Status, which used to rely on POW for spam-protection, to the extent that the difficulty level had to be set close to zero. 

Reviewer: capitalization Proof of Work

Maybe break paragraphs further? quite heavy

#### Peer Scoring

> The peer scoring method[^6] that is utilized by libp2p is to limit the number of messages issued by a peer in connection to another peer. That is each peer monitors all the peers to which it is directly connected and adjusts their messaging quota i.e., to route or not route their messages depending on their past activities. For example, if a peer detects its neighbor is sending more than x messages per month, can drop its quota to z.x where z is less than one.  The shortcoming of this solution is that scoring is based on peers' local observations and the concept of the score is defined in relation to one single peer. This leaves room for attack where a spammer can make connections to k peers in the system and publishes k.(x-1)  messages by exploiting all of its k connections. Another attack scenario is through botnets consisting of a large number of e.g., a million bots. The attacker rents a botnet and inserts each of them as a legitimate peer to the network and each can publish x-1 messages per month[^7].<!-- Another downside is the possibility of false-positive, where the attacker can surround one single peer with some spam peers and make him look like a spammer and cause him to get removed by his neighbors. It also exhibits issues around privacy as well as arbitrary exclusion. -->

Reviewer: Remove comment if we don't want it, "room for an attack where"

#### Economic-Incentive Spam protection

> Is it the end of the spam-protection journey!? shall we get along with the spammers!? Certainly not!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Is this the end of our spam-protection journey? Shall we simply give up and leave spammers be? Certainly not!
```

Waku RLN-Relay gives us a p2p spam-protection method which:
- is **efficient**  i.e., with no unreasonable computational, storage, memory, and bandwidth requirement! as such, it fits the network of **heterogeneous** peers. 
- respects users **privacy** unlike reputation-based and centralized methods.
- deploys **economic-incentives** to contain spammers' activity. Namely, there is a financial sacrifice for those who want to spam the system. How? follow along ...

We devise a general rule to save everyone's life and that is 

**No one can publish more than M messages per epoch without being financially charged!** 

> We set M to 1 for now, but keep in mind, it can be any arbitrary value.
> You may be thinking that it is too restrictive! one per epoch!? but don't worry, we set the epoch to a reasonable value so that it does not slow down the communication of innocent users but will make the life of spammers harder! Epoch here can be every second, as defined by UTC date-time +-20s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We set M to 1 for now, but this can be any arbitrary value. You may be thinking "This is too restrictive! Only one per epoch?". Don't worry, we set the epoch to a reasonable value so that it does not slow down the communication of innocent users but will make the life of spammers harder! Epoch here can be every second, as defined by UTC date-time +-20s.
```

# Technical Terms

**Zero-knowledge proof**: Zero-knowledge proof (ZKP)[^14] allows a *prover* to show a *verifier* that they know something, without revealing what that something is. This means you can do the trust-minimized computation that is also privacy-preserving. As a basic example, instead of showing your ID when going to a bar you simply give them proof that you are over 18, without showing the doorman your id. In this write-up, by ZKP we essentially mean zkSNARK[^15] which is one of the many types of ZKPs. 

**Threshold Secret Sharing Scheme**: (m,n) Threshold secret-sharing is a method by which you can split a secret value s into n pieces in a way that the secret s can be reconstructed by having m pieces (m <= n). The economic-incentive spam protection utilizes a (2,n) secret sharing realized by Shamir Secret Sharing Scheme[^13].

> # Overview: Economic-Incentive Spam protection through Rate Limiting Nullifiers

Reviewer: I'd add a paragraph here with "Context" that briefly summarizes previous post and all the improvements that have been made on blockers since then. Proof time etc. This gives a sense of continuity

- **Membership fee**: Membership is not for free! each peer has to lock a certain amount of funds during the registration (this means peers have to have an Ethereum account with sufficient balance for this sake). This fund is safely stored on the contract and remains intact unless the peer attempts to break the rules and publish more than one message per epoch. 
- **Zero-knowledge Proof of membership**: Do you want your message to get routed to its destination, fine, but you have to prove that you are a member of the group (sorry, no one can escape the registration phase!). Now, you may be thinking that should I attach my public key to my message to prove my membership? Absolutely Not! we said that our solution respects privacy! membership proofs are done in a zero-knowledge manner that is each message will carry cryptographic proof asserting that "the message is generated by one of the current members of the group", so your identity remains private and your anonymity is preserved!

> - **Slashing through secret sharing**: Till now it does not seem like we can catch spammers, right? yes, you are right! now comes the exciting part, detecting spammers and slashing them. The core idea behind the slashing is that each publishing peer (not routing peers!) has to integrate a secret share of its private key inside the message. The secret share is deterministically computed over the private key and the current epoch. The content of this share is harmless for the peer's privacy (it looks random) unless the peer attempts to publish more than one message in the same epoch hence disclosing more than one secret share of its private key. Indeed two distinct shares of the private key under the same epoch are enough to reconstruct the entire private key. Then what should you do with the recovered private key? hurry up! go to the contract and withdraw the private key and claim its fund and get rich!! Are you thinking what if spammers attach junk values instead of valid secret shares? Of course, that wouldn't be cool! so, there is a zero-knowledge proof for this sake as well where the publishing peer has to prove that the secret shares are generated correctly.

Reviewer: not bold for soem reason

# Flow 
In this section, we describe the flow of the economic-incentive spam detection mechanism from the viewpoint of a single peer. An overview of this flow is provided in Figure 2.

> ## SetUp and Registration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Setup and Registration

```

A peer willing to publish a message is required to register. Registration is moderated through a smart contract deployed on the Ethereum blockchain. The state of the contract contains the list of registered members' public keys. An overview of registration is illustrated in Figure 1.

For the registration, a peer creates a transaction that sends x amount of Ether to the contract. The peer who has the "private key" `sk` associated with that deposit would be able to withdraw x Ether by providing valid proof. Note that  `sk` is initially only known by the owning peer however it may get exposed to other peers in case the owner attempts spamming the system i.e., sending more than one message per epoch.
The following relation holds between the `sk` and `pk` i.e., `pk=h(sk)` where `h` denotes a hash function.

<!-- diagram -->

<p align="center">
    <img src="../assets/img/RLN-Relay/RLN-Relay.png" />
    <br />
    Figure 1: Registration.
</p>

> ## Maintaining membership Merkle Tree

Reviewer: Grammar, maybe Maintaining the membership merkle tree?

Finally, the peer generates a zero-knowledge proof  `zkProof`  asserting the membership of the peer in the group and the correctness of the attached secret share (`shareX`, `shareY`) and `nullifier`. In order to generate a valid proof, the peer needs to have its `sk`, its authentication path, the tree root, epoch, and obviously the content of the message.

**Privacy Hint:** Note that the authentication path of each peer depends on the recent list of members (hence changes when new peers register or leave). As such, it is recommended (and necessary for privacy/anonymity) that the publisher updates her authentication path based on the latest status of the group and attempts the proof using the updated version.

An overview of the publishing procedure is provided in Figure 2.

## Routing

Upon the receipt of a message, the routing peer needs to decide whether to route it or not. This decision relies on the following factors:

> 1- If the epoch value attached to the message has a non-reasonable gap with the routing peer's current epoch then the message must be dropped (this is to prevent a newly registered peer spamming the system by messaging for all the past epochs). 

Reviewer: I'd be consistent with 1) 2) or 1. 2. or - - -

2- The message MUST contain valid proof that gets verified by the routing peer. 
If the preceding checks are passed successfully, then the message is Relayed. In case of an invalid proof, the message is dropped. If spamming is detected, the publishing peer gets slashed (see [Spam Detection and Slashing](#Spam-Detection-and-Slashing)). 

An overview of the routing procedure is provided in Figure 2.

### Spam Detection and Slashing
In order to enable local spam detection and slashing, routing peers MUST record the `nullifier`, `shareX`, and `shareY` of any incoming message conditioned that it is not spam and has valid proof. To do so, the peer should follow the following steps. 
1. The routing peer first verifies the `zkProof` and drops the message if not verified. 
2. Otherwise, it checks whether a message with an identical `nullifier` has already been Relayed. 

>    1. If such message exists and its `shareX` and `shareY` components are different from the incoming message, then slashing takes place (if the `shareX` and `shareY` fields of the previously Relayed message is identical to the incoming message, then the message is a duplicate and shall be dropped).

Reviewer: a and b for second level for clarity imo

   2. If none found, then the message gets Relayed.

An overview of the slashing procedure is provided in Figure 2.

<p align="center">
    <img src="../assets/img/RLN-Relay/RLN-message-verification.png" />
    <br />
    Figure 2: Publishing, Routing and Slashing workflow.
</p>

> # Feasibility and Open Issues

Reviewer: Maybe brief intro "We've come a long way since a year ago, blockers resolved, now we have implemented it e2e and learned a lot, identified more issues etc etc. Still some issues blocking getting to production..."

- In line with the storage optimization, the full-node light-node structure is another path to follow. However, there is already a privacy concern about the full-light node approach where light nodes have to expose their index in the tree to the full-nodes in order to fetch their membership proof /authentication path. The peer's index is somewhat a private data hence the privacy implication of such exposure must be studied and analyzed as well. 
- Another possible improvement is to replace the membership contract with a distributed group management scheme e.g., through distributed hash tables. This is to address possible performance issues that the interaction with the Ethereum blockchain may cause.  For example, the registration transactions are subject to delay as they have to be mined before being visible in the state of the membership contract. This means peers have to wait for some time before being able to publish any message.

# Acknowledgement
Thanks to Onur Kılıç for his explanation and pointers and for helping with development and runtime issues. Also thanks to Barry Whitehat for his time and insightful comments.

> # References

Reviewer: Missing previous RLN vac.dev post / blockers there

[^1]: Waku v2: https://github.com/vacp2p/specs/blob/master/specs/waku/v2/waku-v2.md

> [^2]: RLN-Relay specifications: https://github.com/vacp2p/vacp2p.github.io/blob/RLN-Relay/_posts/2021-02-19-26-RLN-Relay.md

Reviewer: Circular referencing? :D

[^3]: RLN documentation: https://hackmd.io/tMTLMYmTR5eynw2lwK9n1w?both
[^4]: RLN repository: https://github.com/kilic/RLN
[^5]: RLN Benchmark: https://hackmd.io/tMTLMYmTR5eynw2lwK9n1w?view#Benchmarks
[^6]: Peer Scoring: https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/pubsub/gossipsub/gossipsub-v1.1.md#peer-scoring
[^7]: Peer scoring security issues: https://github.com/vacp2p/research/issues/44

> [^8]: Proof of work: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/proof-work.asp

Reviewer: Hm, not the best reference probably :sweat_smile: Maybe Bitcoin paper? And/Or Waku spec? There's a great ref re PoW for spam protection from 80s in anon comm literature, probably in Zotero, but can't find it right now

> [^9]: Whisper: https://eth.wiki/concepts/whisper/whisper

Reviewer: I'd link to EIP, referenced in Waku v0/v1 spec

[^10]: Cost-effective way of member insertion and deletion: https://github.com/vacp2p/research/issues/56
[^11]: Storage overhead per peer: https://github.com/vacp2p/research/issues/57
[^12]: Storage-efficient Merkle Tree maintenance: https://github.com/vacp2p/research/pull/54
[^13]: Shamir Secret Sharing Scheme: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shamir%27s_Secret_Sharing
[^14]: Zero Knowledge Proof: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-knowledge_proof

> [^15]: zkSNARK: https://hongchao.me/zksnark/

Reviewer: zkSNARKs? Ditto above

Author: added a new ref
